--- 
meta: 
dsq_thread_id: "199808774" 
_wp_old_slug: "" 
_edit_last: "1" 
type: post 
published: true 
status: publish 
title: IL Communication 
tags: - Libraries - Transliteracy 
layout: post 
--- 

Last week, David Rothman posted [Commensurable Nonsense (Transliteracy)](http://davidrothman.net/2010/12/19/commensurable-nonsense-transliteracy/), a post critical of transliteracy from an Information Literacy perspective. David’s arguments were plausible-sounding fallacies, leading to some serious confusion. 

## tl;dr

Information Literacy is a **bad name for really good concepts**. Let’s change
the name (again!) to avoid confusion.

## Plausible Fallacies

Rothman’s post starts with the two most common definitions of literacy:

  * an ability to read and write
  * knowledge of a specific subject
Nothing wrong there. However, it’s implied that for the purposes of
transliteracy the second definition is the important one. I don’t see how one
would reach that conclusion, given that the definition of transliteracy quoted
later in the post starts “_Transliteracy is the ability to read, write and
interact...,_” pointing to the first definition rather than the second.
**Transliteracy is about reading and writing** (or their equivalents in other
senses/contexts); working from some different assumption is a straw man. The
second problem is that **Information Literacy is not a literacy per his own
criteria**. If a literacy is an ability to read and write or knowledge of a
particular subject, where does “_Information Literacy is the set of skills
needed to find, retrieve, analyze, and use information_”  fit? The common
definitions of IL as critical skills are incompatible with the extended-but-
conventional literacies of transliteracy. As such, comparing IL to
transliteracy in such a manner has no bearing.

## Implications

This framing of transliteracy as a subset of Information Literacy was implied
by Lane Wilkinson’s post [Transliteracy and
Incommensurability](http://librariesandtransliteracy.wordpress.com/2010/12/10
/transliteracy-and-incommensurability/), further implied by Rothman’s, and
[elaborated upon by
Meredith](http://meredith.wolfwater.com/wordpress/2010/12/21/transliteracy-
from-the-perspective-of-an-information-literacy-advocate/) Farkas,
[Lane](http://senseandref.blogspot.com/2010/12/final-thoughts-on-
transliteracy.html)
[Wilkinson](http://librariesandtransliteracy.wordpress.com/2010/12/20/why-
transliteracy/), and [others](http://inkandvellum.com/blog/2010/12/more-
transliteracy-talk-metaphors-and-metonyms/). The second problem I mentioned —
that Information Literacy isn’t a literacy — underlies the growing
misconception. IL _requires_ conventional literacies, but is _not encompassing
of them_ by definition. IL advocates apparently consider IL to be all-
encompassing, but that’s a difficult-to-defend position. As such, the topics
important to transliteracy, at least before last week, are distinct from IL.
The ensuing discussion has led to confusion over the practical boundaries of
these terms. For instance, it isn’t clear how big transliteracy’s domain is
per this newly-thin-air-pulled definition. In [Why
Transliteracy?](http://librariesandtransliteracy.wordpress.com/2010/12/20/why-
transliteracy/), Lane insinuates transliteracy encompasses the Venn diagram of
IL:

> For me, transliteracy is the bridge between isolated spheres of information
literacy,...

But on his personal blog, [he writes](http://senseandref.blogspot.com/2010/12
/final-thoughts-on-transliteracy.html):

> I'm only using transliteracy as a catch-all for one particular slice of
information literacy that I haven't seen before.

This leads me to wonder: is transliteracy an umbrella over Information
Literacy and other literacies as most everyone seemed to agree prior to last
week, or just some small sliver of IL?

## Call to Deprecate

It’s neither, of course! Information Literacy is the notable exception to the
transliteracy umbrella. I hinted at this in my [Redefining
Transliteracy](/2010/11/12/redefining-transliteracy/) post and [a smidge on
twitter](http://twitter.com/ao5357/status/17012153634525184); here are the
charges against IL’s compatibility with transliteracy:

  1. Transliteracy is an ability to read and write across things (which I frame as languages, while others prefer platforms, tools, and media for some unknown reason), whereas **IL is an ability to find and critique information**
  2. From a reading/writing lens, or any lens for that matter, all literacies are information literacies. IL as a term is redundant and overly-broad
  3. However an information literate entity interacts with information, that interaction is indirect, as information does not exist in any raw form. IL as a term is non-specific to the point of triviality
I cite these charges as more than just a reason not to compare Information
Literacy and transliteracy directly; I also contend that it’s **reason to
deprecate Information Literacy and call its skills something else**. We’ve
done this before. As a field of study, Library and Information Science
effectively deprecated the term “Bibliographic Instruction” in favor of
“Information Literacy.” The reasons behind this switch, it appears to me, were
fourfold:

  1. Proponents of Bibliographic Instruction became entrenched in out-moded concepts and techniques, and were unwilling to adapt BI to new technologies and methods
  2. The word ‘Bibliographic’ itself implies books. Library-ish instruction is about much more than books
  3. Information Literacy as a term focuses on the skills of the learner, whereas Bibliographic Instruction as a term was about teaching those skills
  4. Information Literacy _sounds_ really frickin’ good
If [David Rothman is correct about anything, librarians are pedants of
language](http://davidrothman.net/2010/12/22/pedantic-liquor-for-librarians/).
As such, clarity in the terminology we use for our core principles should be
paramount. Additionally, re-re-coining this set of skills might cure what many
seem to agree is cyclical entrenchment (per #1). Here’s what I’m proposing:
From some point in the near future on, people talking about the **useful,
respectable principles** currently referred to erroneously as “Information
Literacy” should instead use the term [insert term here]. Previous references
to Bibliographic Instruction, Information Literacy, and other less-than-ideal
terms should be considered [insert term here] by implication.

## Conclusion

I think transliteracy and Information Literacy are like peanut butter and
jelly. You can have one without the other, but they’re usually better
together. If we can remove the myth that IL is a literacy of comparison
(through deprecation or social agreement), we can more effectively work to
develop a helpful instructional ecosystem for our patrons. We can look at
transliteracy for all the different ways people encode and decode information,
and Information Literacy for the critical skills associated with that
information parsing.

